Add advanced widget doc page (#1896)
openhab/openhab-docs: ui/advanced-widgets.md

---
title: Advanced Custom Widgets
---

# Custom Widgets - Advanced Topics

[[toc]]

This page expands of some of the topics initially introduced in [Building Pages](building-pages.html).

## Advanced Components

> In the custom widget system there are many options for different components to include beyond the standard OH set.  Where each component comes from determines many of the options available for configuration and styling.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the custom widget system there are many options for different components to include beyond the standard openHAB (abbrev. OH) set.
The source of each component determines which options are available for configuration and styling.
```

### F7 components

> The MainUI is built primarily using the [Framework7](https://framework7.io/) library.  Because most of the OH specific components are built on top of these f7 components, [the documentation of the f7 components](https://framework7.io/vue/) is useful for users wishing to understand more about the OH components as well.  In addition, however, the f7 components themselves are available as options in the widget editor.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The MainUI is built primarily using the [Framework7](https://framework7.io/) library. 
Because most of the OH specific components are built on top of these f7 components, [the documentation of the f7 components](https://framework7.io/vue/) is useful for users wishing to understand more about the OH components as well. 
In addition, however, the f7 components themselves are available as options in the widget editor.
```

Put each sentence on its own line as this simplifies tracking changes.

> As a general rule, the f7 components will have more configuration and style flexibility than the OH counterparts.  So, their use is recommended when there is something about the component that needs to be configured in a way different than what is set in the OH version.  Of course, the f7 components do not have the OH specific functions available, so while they can have values based on items using the epxression system, they cannot easily be used to trigger rules, update items or variables, etc.

Reviewer: I personally would prefer to capitalize `Items` as this is an OH term.
This is not consistent across the docs, but most newer doc changes capitalize OH terms like `Items`, `Things`, ….

Again, put each sentence on its own line.

> The most commonly used f7 components will likely be the `f7-block`, `f7-row`, and `f7-col`.  These all generate a simple `<div>` element with one base f7 class (`block`, `row`, and `col` respectively).  These components are therefore useful as fundamental building-blocks of widget or page. The list components `f7-list-item` and `f7-list-item-row` can often be useful as well given the flexibility they provide for complex structure inside a list.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The most commonly used f7 components will likely be the `f7-block`, `f7-row`, and `f7-col`.  These all generate a simple `<div>` element with one base f7 class (`block`, `row`, and `col` respectively). 
These components are therefore useful as fundamental building-blocks of widget or page. 
The list components `f7-list-item` and `f7-list-item-row` can often be useful as well given the flexibility they provide for complex structure inside a list.
```

To many spaces between the `.` and the beginning of the next sentence.

> Any of the OH components that allow for [wiget actions](building-pages.html#actions), include easy configuration for using some other widget as a popup or popover.  If, however, there is need for the popup or popover to be built-in with a single widget (e.g., to add a widget to the [marketplace](https://community.openhab.org/c/marketplace/ui-widgets/75) that includes a popup or popover), the `f7-popup` and `f7-popover` component can be used and the open or closed status of that modal object controled by the `popupOpen`, `popupClose`, `popoverOpen`, and `popoverClose` properties available in many of the other f7 components and their OH derivaties.

Reviewer: I am not sure if `Any of the OH components that allow widget actions` (without the `for`) is better.

In contrast, the `Content` component renders the value given by the `text` property *without* any additional container.  For example:

```yaml
- component: f7-row
  config:
    class: fancy-row
  slots:
    default:
      - component: Content
        config:
          text: Content text here
```

renders in the page html as:

```html
<div class="row fancy-row">Content text here</div>
```

With no container, there is no possibility to add `class` or `style` configuration to the `Content` component.

### HTML Components

The custom widget system can also be used to build html more directly.  The `component` property can also be set to any recognized html tag.  When used like this the component accepts any configuration paramaters that can be passed to the tag as html attributes (inlcuding, of course, `class` and `style`).  There is an additional configuration parameter, `content` which allows for content text to be inlcuded in the tag.

> Html components also accept a `default` slot which will render a child component inside the tag.

Reviewer: Please capitalise `HTML`.

#### HTML component examples

The widget yaml:

```yaml
- component: div
  config:
    content: Make this text bold
    style:
        font-weight: bold
```

> Becomes the html:

Reviewer: `Renders to this HTML:` might be better.

```html
<div style="font-weight: bold;">Make this text bold</div>
```

To put more complex html heirarchies, use the component's `default` slot:

```yaml
- component: div
  config:
    style:
      font-style: italic
  slots:
    default:
      - component: Content
        config:
          text: "This text starts with italics "
      - component: span
        config:
          content: but then becomes BOLD!
          style:
            font-weight: bold
```

Becomes the html:

```html
<div style="font-style: italic;">
  This text starts with italics <span style="font-weight: bold;">but then becomes BOLD!</span>
</div>
```

## The Expression Syntax

> The widget expression system uses a javascript-like expression parser, [jse-eval](https://github.com/6utt3rfly/jse-eval).  In order to remain light-weight and responsive, this is not a complete javascript library, but nearly all of the basic function is provided along with some more advanced features.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The widget expression system uses a JavaScript-like expression parser, [jse-eval](https://github.com/6utt3rfly/jse-eval). 
In order to remain light-weight and responsive, this is not a complete JavaScript library, but nearly all of the basic function is provided along with some more advanced features.
```

Here a widget proptery containing an item name is searched using regex and the first capture (in this case all characters between two underscores) is returned as a component label.

```yaml
label: =props.item.match(/_(.*)_/)[1]
```

#### Objects

The variable action allows components in widgets to pass information back and forth when there is user interaction.  Often this informtation is simple, such as a single string or input value.  Sometimes, however, it is helpul to add more information to a variable and for these instances javascript opjects are useful.  The widget system can create widgets in two different ways.

Objects can be defined withthin the expression system using the standard javascript syntax: `{'key1':'value1','key2':'value2'}`.

::: tip

Due to the special meaning of `:[space]` in yaml, it is best to have no spaces between the `:` and the value.  If you have `:[space]` anywhere in your expression it will raise a yaml error unless you enclose the entire expression (= included) in another layer of quotes.

:::

Here a variable is set to an object with `name` and `selected` keys using the object expression.

```yaml
actionVariable: myObject

> actionVariableValue: ={'name':props.item,'selected':true}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
actionVariableValue: ={ 'name' : props.item, 'selected' : true }
```

This improves readability.

Here is a variable definition with the same results as the one above using the yaml syntax.

```yaml
actionVariable: myObject
actionVariableValue:
  name: =props.item
  selected: =true
```

In both cases, the variable can now be referenced by other components as `vars.myObject` with keys `vars.myObject.name` and `vars.myObject.selected`.

The object expression can also be used to simulate a `switch` control statement.  The most common flow control statement in the expressions is the [conditional (ternary) operator](building-pages.html#dynamically-configuring-components-with-expressions) which is very efficient for selecting from two options based on a single boolean criterion.  If you have a list of possible options, you can string multiple ternary operators together, but this grows cumbersome very quickly.  For example, if there is an HVAC with a mode item that can be set to `heat`, `cool`, `auto`, and `off` modes, it requires 4 nested ternary operators to set a component's background color to match the current HVAC mode (with a fall back option if the item has some other state, e.g. `null`).

```yaml

> background: =(@@hvacModeItem == 'heat')?'orange':(@@hvacModeItem == 'cool')?'blue':(@@hvacModeItem == 'auto')?'green':(@@hvacModeItem == 'off')?'white':'red'

Reviewer: ```suggestion
background: =(@@hvacModeItem == 'heat') ? 'orange' : (@@hvacModeItem == 'cool') ? 'blue' : (@@hvacModeItem == 'auto') ? 'green' : (@@hvacModeItem == 'off') ? 'white' : 'red'
```
Improves readability.

```

To use an object instead, simply create an object with keys for each of the item's expected states, and give each key the desired output value.  Referencing that object using the item's state will return the desired value and following that with a simple `OR` statement will provide the valueback condition if the object reference is undefined.

```yaml

> background: =({'heat':'orange','cool':'blue','auto':'green','off':'white'})[@@hvacModeItem] || 'red'

Reviewer: ```suggestion
background: =({ 'heat' : 'orange', 'cool' : 'blue', 'auto ': 'green', 'off' : 'white' })[@@hvacModeItem] || 'red'
```
Improves readability.
